#LyX 2.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 474
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass extreport
\use_default_options false
\begin_modules
theorems-ams
eqs-within-sections
figs-within-sections
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language bulgarian
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_math auto
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing onehalf
\use_hyperref false
\papersize a4paper
\use_geometry true
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 2.5cm
\topmargin 2cm
\rightmargin 2cm
\bottommargin 2cm
\headheight 1cm
\headsep 2cm
\footskip 1cm
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language german
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Chapter
Изследване характеристиките на
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

предавателни линии на границата диелектрик-полупроводник
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Ефективна диелектрична проницаемост на предавателни линии върху сложни полупрово
дникови материали
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Нов метод за измерване на ефективната диелектрична проницаемост в предавателни
 линии върху сложни полупроводникови подложки, използвайки данни от ЕМ симулатор
 и директни измервания върху чип са представени в тази част.
 Методологията включва структури обикновенно реализирани върху сложна полупровод
никова подложка и може да бъде използвана при процедура 
\begin_inset Quotes gld
\end_inset

калибриране
\begin_inset Quotes grd
\end_inset

 или 
\begin_inset Quotes gld
\end_inset

de-embedding
\begin_inset Quotes grd
\end_inset

 на предвателни линии, нееднородности или 
\begin_inset Quotes gld
\end_inset

падове
\begin_inset Quotes grd
\end_inset

 на чипа.
 Изчисляването на ефективната диелектрична проницаемост от характеристичния
 импеданс и константата на разпространение на предложените структури е напълно
 достатъчно за характеризирането използвайки измерени или симулирани S-параметри.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Методологията е приложима за окачествяване на диелектрични или многослойни
 полупроводникови подложки без загуби, както и със загуби в широка честотна
 лента.
 Друго предимство на методологията е използването на предавателни линии
 с физически размери многократно по-малки от четвърт дължина на вълната
 за най-високата работна честота на изследваното устройство.
 По този начин се спестява реална площ, която може да бъде използвана за
 проектиране на реални устройства, а не характеризирането им.
 Не на последно място методологията е съвместима с някои от елементите използван
и при т.нар.
 калибровка - 
\begin_inset Quotes gld
\end_inset

TRL (Thru, Reflect, Line).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Една от предпоставките за непрекъснатото търсене на преносими и все по интегрира
ни компоненти и подсистеми е увеличаващото се търсене на безжични комуникации
 за лична употреба и увеличаващият се брой приложения за тях.
 В следствие на това предизвикателствата към полупроводниковите подложки,
 сложността на интегралните схеми, мултичипни модули и асемблирането расте.
 Днес за намаляване на паразитните капацитети и увеличаване плътността на
 връзките между отделните чипове се използват 3D методи на асемблиране при
 големи интегрални схеми или схеми използващи както цифрови така и бързи
 аналогви сигнали - специализирани ИС за смесени сигнали.
 Много често полупроводниковите подложки имат значителни омични загуби,
 поради крайната си проводимост.
 Характеризирането на активните и пасивните елементи проектирани върху такива
 подложки и тяхното взаимно влияние може да бъде подложено на въпрос, ако
 не бъдат използвани подходящи методи за измерване и окачествяване.
 При условие, че размерите на проектираните устройства не са електрически
 малки, се използват т.нар.
 методи с разпределени параметри за изследването.
 Основните методи използвани за симулиране параметрите на устройствата са
 FDTD
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Frequently these substrates possess an inherently lossy characteristic,
 which circumstance deteriorate their performance or puts the accuracy of
 active and passive elements modeling under question.
 At frequencies where the dimensions are not electrically small, it is necessary
 to use complex distributed models of investigation.
 General full wave numerical methods such as FDTD, FEM, MoM and PEEC have
 been applied to model these structures successfully.
 The basic key to build successful models and perform genuine electromagnetic
 simulations of topology layout is the knowledge of complex characteristic
 impe­dance and propagation constant in transmission line structures on
 the upper interconnect levels.
 Ultimately, it is necessary for the IC industry to characterize these losses
 and novel dielectric properties of such sequenced isolation and semiconductor
 layers, with different thicknesses and physical dielectric permittivity,
 in order to build a representative interconnect characterization database
 [1].
 The most reliable information about wave propagation in multilayer metal/dielec
tric/semiconductor systems is knowledge of the effective dielectric constant,
 derived straightforwardly from the propagation constant, more precisely
 its imaginary part – the phase constant.
 Previous research has demonstrated S-parameter characterization of interconnect
 transmission lines, based on two-port measurements, R-L-G-C modeling and
 extraction of characteristic impedance Zc and propagation constant γ [1,
 2, 3].
 The core of our approach is the same but differs in some aspects from the
 well-known procedure: a) we rather implement and measure one-port open-end
 stubs instead of relatively long transmission lines with two ports); b)
 short-end stubs are not included in the measurement test set-up in order
 to eliminate the inserted parasitic inductance of grounding through-hole
 vias and because of the impossibility to build them by some technologies;
 c) two-port measurements are conduc­ted on a transmission line with the
 same length, width and contact pads (launchers) geometry as the open-end
 stub; d) Zc and γ are extracted directly from S-para­meter data of the
 one-port capacitive and inductive stubs.
 In many cases, existing de-embedding structures and some of the TRL calibration
 standards in the test set-up could be easily implemented to acquire the
 necessary one-port stub S-parameters for calculations of the propagation
 constant.
 The effective dielectric constant is derived from the phase constant [5].
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Theory of transmission line stubs
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Open and short stubs are widely used in microwave designs as capacitor and
 inductor to ground.
 For example many DC biasing circuits implement stubs to achieve higher
 isolation between the power supply and the RF signal.
 The size of the stubs is small enough to build LC filters and matching
 networks, when their length is smaller or equal to λline /4.
 Conventional small signal z-, y-, and ABCD-parameters, are not suitable
 for high frequency inter­con­nect charac­terization, because open and short
 termi­nations re­quired to measure this data cannot be easily implemented
 in “on-wafer” applications and deteriorate performance by insertion of
 impedance parasitics.
 The “short” circuit terminations possess parasitic induc­tance of GND via,
 while “open” circuit terminations have external capa­citance, due to the
 fringing effect of the edge electric field at high fre­quen­cies.
 S-parameter measurements, defined in terms of inci­dent and reflected waves
 in a controlled 50-Ω measure­ment system, reliably characterize inter­con­nect
 high fre­quency responses.
 The input impedance Zin of a given interconnect trans­mis­sion line can
 be readily derived from the simulated or measured two-port S-parameters
 [2].
 Placing the S-para­me­ters in a schematic simulator and providing ideal
 ground connection at one of the ports can give us information about the
 input impe­dance, when the line is shorted to ground.
 The same is valid if one of the ports is left open.
 (1a) (1b) From transmission line theory and Telegrapher equations Zinput
 short and Zinput open for short lines with length l < λ /4 the input impedance
 is defined from the equivalent circuit on Fig.
 1.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
From Fig.1 and the expression of the input impedance of a loaded transmission
 line, when the load Zc is 0 (short) or ∞ (open), the following equations
 are valid for Z: (2a) (2b) Above equations represent infinite small part
 of a regular long tran­smission line when loaded with ZC = 0, ∞ - (short)
 and (open) impedance.
 First equation defines the losses in the TRL metal layers and includes
 skin-effect.
 Second equation is connected to the substrate die­lec­tric losses, caused
 by substrate leakage or some semiconductor conductivity.
 If the physical length of the transmission line is l < λ/4, the input impedance
s from (1a) and (2a) are equal.
 The same is valid for (1b) and (2b).
 For simplicity we shall work from now on with Zinput short and Zinput open.
 (3)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
After multiplying (2a) and (2b) and substituting Zinput short and Zinput
 open, from equation (1) we get the following for the charac­teristic impedance
 ZC, where Z0 is the system impedance 50 Ω: (4a) (4b) After some algebra
 transformations by substitution of (1), (2) and (3) in (4) is obtained:
 (4c) where X is hyperbolic tangency of the propagation constant γ multiplied
 by the line length l: (4d) Effective dielectric constant is function of
 the shape and electro-physical transmission line para­me­ters and β can
 be extracted from the imaginary part (phase constant) of the full propa­gation
 constant γ.
 Fromwhere we manage the following expression for εeff: (5) where ω – angular
 frequency, γ – propagation constant and c0 is light velocity.
 Imaginary part of the propagation constant is the phase constant β.
 From (4d) the propagation constant is: (6) where l is the physical length
 of the transmission line, Zinput short is the input impedance obtained
 from (1a) and Zinput open is the input impedance obtained from (1b).
 After substituting (6) in (5) εeff is direcly derived.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Results from measurements and simulations
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Verification of the proposed method was done using elec­tro­magnetic simulations
 and measured S-parameters of micro­strip transmission line with given length
 on GaAs and SiGe sub­strates.
 In this work a comparison of effective dielec­tric constant εeff and characteri
stic impedances ZC was done using method of moments (MoM) for transmis­sion
 lines with several lengths and widths on two types of semiconductor substrates.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fig.
 2.
 Substrates used in elecotromagnetic simulator for extraction of S-parameters:
 a) non-conductive sub.
 - GaAs b) conductive sub.
 - SiGe.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Simulation parameters of the semiconductor substrates are given on Fig.
 2.
 Main difference is the conductivity of both substrates.
 In this work for the conducti­vity of the GaAs substrate is taken σ = 0.2
 S/m.
 Typical conductivity of SiGe substrates vary between 10 - 30 S/m and in
 our simulations it is σ = 25 S/m.
 On Fig.
 3., Fig.
 4 and Fig.
 5 are presented simulations of mic­ro­strip lines on non-conductive substrate
 over freq­uency range 1 – 40 GHz and line widths: 5 μm, 10 μm, 15 μm, 30
 μm, 60 μm.
 For the same widths additional simulations were performed with lengths
 of the MSL: 30 μm, 100 μm, 150 μm, 200 μm and 300 μm.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fig.
 3.
 Effective dielectric constant εeff of MSL, non-conductive substrate (GaAs);
 width = 5, 10, 15, 30, 60 μm; length = 30, 100, 150, 300 μm.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fig.
 4.
 Real part of ZC for MSL, non-conductive substrate (GaAs); width = 5, 10,
 15, 30, 60 μm; length = 30, 100, 150, 300 μm.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fig.
 5.
 Imaginary part of ZC for MSL, non-conductive substrate (GaAs); width =
 5, 10, 15, 30, 60 μm; length = 30, 100, 150, 300 μm.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Simulated results prove that the length of the TRL doesn't have significant
 effect over εeff and ZC.
 Effective dielectric constant varies from 6.5 to 4.7 with the change of the
 width.
 This means that if we increase the width of TRL the capacitive coupling
 between the top metal layer and bottom ground increases too.
 From electromagnetic point of view - more energy from the electromganetic
 TEM wave will be enclosed within the substrate.
 The same simulations have been performed for conduc­tive substrate as SiGe
 shown on Fig.2b.
 The results are depicted on Fig.6., Fig.7 and Fig.
 8.
 The exact analysis of microstrip line build on con­duc­tive substrates
 is given in [4], where the existence of three fundamental modes i.e.
 “dielectric quasi-TEM mode”, “skin-effect mode” and “slow-wave mode” is
 demons­trated, and the conditions for the appearance of each mode are clari­fie
d by the resistivity (of the substrate) / frequency dependance: When the
 product of the frequency and the resistivity of
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fig.
 6.
 Effective dielectric constant εeff of MSL, conductive substrate (SiGe);
 width = 5, 10, 15, 30, 60 μm; length = 30, 100, 150, 300 μm.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fig.
 7.
 Real part of ZC for MSL, conductive substrate (SiGe); width = 5, 10, 15,
 30, 60 μm; length = 30, 100, 150, 300 μm.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fig.
 8.
 Imaginary part of ZC for MSL, conductive substrate (SiGe); width = 5, 10,
 15, 30, 60 μm; length = 30, 100, 150, 300 μm.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
the Si-substrate is large enough to produce a small dielectric loss angle,
 the substrate acts like a dielectric - TEM mode.
 When the product of the frequency and the substrate conductivity is large
 enough to yield a small depth of field penetration into silicon, the substrate
 would behave like a lossy conductor wall, and the line may be treated as
 a microstrip line on the imperfect “ground plane” (MIM) metal / dielectric
 / metal structure.
 When the frequency is not so high and the resistivity is moderate, the
 substrate acts like none of the above cases, and slow-surface wave propagates
 along the line.
 Good agreement between theoretical and simulated results is observed on
 Fig.
 6.
 For lower frequencies and wider transmission lines the effective dielectric
 constant looks like εeff of a capacitor with slightly con­duc­tive dielec­tric
 between the plates.
 In our case this is reasonable for “skin-effect mode” and the transmission
 line acts like a microstrip line without “ground plane”.
 For higher freq­uen­cies the pro­duct of dielectric loss-angle and substrate
 is large enough and the substrate acts like isolating dielectric.
 In this case εeff varies between 6 - 18 and real part of ZC from 40 – 110
 Ω.
 For both substrates the imaginary part of ZC is small and the simulated
 impedances alter from -30 to 10 Ω in the frequency range.
 Verification measurement using network analyzer and GaAs test struc­tures
 was done.
 On Fig.
 9 is given the layout of the test structures analysed by the proposed methodolo
gy.
 By means of VNA - HP 8510C Network Analyzer and probe station were measured
 S-parameters of the transmission line with length 1129 μm.
 The VNA calibration software makes analysis of the structure and extracts
 the effective dielectric constant for the calibrated bandwidth in single
 S1P file.
 Using this file and the extracted parameters of the TRL with the VNA, we
 made comparison between the VNA results and described methodology.
 The graphics are pointed out on Fig.
 10.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fig.
 9.
 Microstrip line on GaAs with length = 1129 μm and width = 40 μm.
 Thru and reflect standards (open) for TRL calibration.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fig.10.
 Measured and extracted εeff of microstrip TRL on GaAs substrate.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Algorithm for extraction of microstrip TRL εeff: 1.
 Measure the scattering parameters S11, S21, S12 and S22 of microstrip TRL
 (Wx, Lx < λline/4); 2.
 Place in ciruit simulator and find Sii open and Sii short ; 3.
 Using (1a) and (1b) find Zinput short stub and Zinput open stub ; 4.
 Using (4) find ZC of the TRL 5.
 Measure the length of the TRL and find the propa­ga­tion constant γ using
 (6); 6.
 Substitute γ in (5) and extract the effective dielectric constant εeff
 .
 The algoritithm of the proposed extraction could be modified in the following
 way.
 Item 1 can be substituted with: one-port measurements of the “open” stub
 by means of the set-up on Fig.
 12a or Fig.
 12c.
 Here must be included one-port measurement of “short” stub by means of
 the set-up on Fig.
 12d.
 Thus the “artificial” obtaining of “short” stub through circuit simulator
 from two-port measured S-parameters data of the transmission line (Wx,
 Lx) is ommited.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fig.
 11.
 Measurement setup with probe station and VNA.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Using this algorithm and calibration structures it is possible to extract
 εeff for simple transmission line with length Lx and width Wx.
 On Fig.12a is shown simple microstrip TRL stub with length Lx and width
 Wx.
 One port measurement can give us information about the input impedances,
 when the TRL is open.
 For two port measure­ments using TRL stan­dards “thru” and “open”, like
 those shown on Fig.12b and Fig.
 12C, provide us enough information for extraction.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fig.
 12.
 Application of existing test structures for extraction of εeff of TRL.
 a) One port measurement of the investigated open stub; b) Two port measurement
 of the investigated stub as a trans.
 line to transform into “short” stub by ideal short in schematic simulator;
 c) De-embedding structure with 2 opren stubs for investigation; d) De-embedding
 structure with 2 shorted stubs for investigation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Ефективна диелектрична проницаемост на
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

диференциална линия на границата диелектрик-полупроводник
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Увод
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Теоретична обосновка
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Анализ на MIS вълноводна структура
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Резултати
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Заключение
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
