#LyX 2.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 474
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass extreport
\use_default_options false
\begin_modules
theorems-ams
eqs-within-sections
figs-within-sections
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language bulgarian
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_math auto
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing onehalf
\use_hyperref false
\papersize a4paper
\use_geometry true
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 2.5cm
\topmargin 2cm
\rightmargin 2cm
\bottommargin 2cm
\headheight 1cm
\headsep 2cm
\footskip 1cm
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language german
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Chapter
Окачествяване на пасивни и активни устройства 
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

чрез “контактни” и “безконтактни” измервания
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Съвременните методи за характеризиране включват както методи с директно
 измерване радиочестотните характеристики, така и безконтактни методи като
 измерване посредством 
\begin_inset Quotes gld
\end_inset

Електромагнитни скенери
\begin_inset Quotes grd
\end_inset


\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "emscan"

\end_inset

, 
\begin_inset Quotes gld
\end_inset

Оптo-електромагнитни скенери
\begin_inset Quotes grd
\end_inset

[], 
\begin_inset Quotes gld
\end_inset

Безехови камери
\begin_inset Quotes grd
\end_inset

[], 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Ниско бюджетен скенер работещ в близката област за радиочестотни измервания
 (Радослав Борисов, Калоян Златков, Пламен Данков).
 Скенерите за измерване на електромагнитно поле работещи в близката зона
 се използват за микровълнови и антенни измервания, както и за измервания
 свързани с електромагнитната съвместимост (ЕМС).
 Скенера измерва пространственото разпределение на електрическия заряд,
 който се детектира чрез една или няколко електромагнитни сонди, поставени
 в близката област на тестваното устройство.
 Тази публикация има за цел да опише процеса на изграждане на ниско бюджетен
 електромагнитен скенер работещ в близката област, използвайки стандартно
 оборудване за микровълнови измервания и 3D принтер.
 Критичните компоненти в дизайна са описани подробно и две устройства са
 измерени, използвайки така направения скенер.
 Използвайки системата една пасивна антена работеща в L обхвата и един балансен
 усилвател бяха измерени.
 Допълнителната обработка на измерените данни се извършва с помощта на софтуер
 с отворен код за визуализация и допълнителна обработка - Paraview[1].
 Някои от предимствата на измерванията със скенер работещи в близката област
 включват високата точност, високата производителност (голямо количество
 данни) и възможността за пълното характеризиране на измерваното устройство.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Introduction The developments of modern technologies have increased a systems
 complexity and new problems like signal integrity and coupling between
 the system components have appeared.
 One of the methods for characterization of the device performance is near-field
 scanning technique.
 Electro­magnetic (EM) near-field scanner determines the spatial distribution
 of electrical quantity acquired in a near field region of the device using
 single or multiple probes.
 Using numerical post-processing techniques it is possible to convert measured
 quantity into electr­omagnetic field.
 Typically near-field scanners are used for antenna measurements [2] or
 electro­magnetic interference measurements [3].
 The advantages of near-field measurements include high accuracy, high throughpu
t (or data rate), a complete characterization of device under test (DUT),
 ability to control different environment effects, minimal requirements
 and compatibility with special project requirements.
 In RF system designs the most common technique for characterization of
 the electromagnetic field is using simulators.
 Complex designs are divided into sub areas and simulated individually,
 because of computation power and time required for solving the problem
 increases with the size of structure area.
 Basically the simulators solve Maxwell’s equations using different approaches
 like MoM, FEM, FDTD etc.
 The structure is described using text files or it is constructed using
 graphical interface of the software in 2.5D or 3D.
 The definition of the ports shows where the electromagnetic energy enters
 the structure and how it exits.
 The scattering matrix shows the energy scattered from the structure at
 the port’s plane.
 Increasing the ports number adds to the simulation time drastically.
 Simulated parts of the complex problem could be combined using S-parameters
 into more complex model of the device or the system.
 This technique is widely used, but it still doesn’t give the full picture,
 due to the fact, that there is coupling between the individually simulated
 parts, that we don’t take into account.
 Usually simulated results are in good agreement with the measurements.
 The so explained process takes a lot of steps and good understanding of
 the problem is needed.
 Good knowledge about the technologies used in the production of the structure
 and experience with the simulator is desirable.
 The simulation technique solves coupling problems in pre and post production
 phase and determines optimal size or shape of the structures.
 Large simulations are usually undesirable and the time needed for solving
 the equations and visualization of the EM field could take days, even on
 servers with 8-cores and 32 GB RAM.
 Near-field scanning technique could be used for rapid measurement of the
 EM field, verification of prototypes, layout optimization and finding coupling
 problems between different modules.
 Direct measurements give relative information about the distribution of
 the field.
 Additional computation is needed to get absolute results for the distribution
 of the field in the far-field region.
 The scanner could maximize designer’s productivity and is focused on solving
 instead of finding EMC problems, which leads to reduced number of board
 spins.
 Measured data is stored and could be used for comparison between board
 iterations.
 It is possible to get immediate feedback for the effectiveness of the correctiv
e measures.
 Using the near-field scanner the designer’s productivity could be optimized,
 design and compliance cost could be reduced and of course the time to market
 is reduced significantly.
 The main purpose of this article is to describe the process of building
 small low cost near-filed scanner using standard equipment and 3D printer.
 This paper describes a methodology for the creation of a small near-field
 EM scanner using standard RF measurement equipment and 3D printer [4].
 Verification of the build system is done using two devices – one passive
 and one active device that work in different sub bands of the RF spectrum.
 Small L-band left-hand circular polarized patch antenna is measured using
 the scanner with two types of RF probes for verification.
 Using the scanner we were able to generate animation of the currents distributi
on on the patch surface for set of frequencies.
 The measurements show that the phase rotates as the wave propagates through
 space in left direction, just as the theory predicts.
 Balanced amplifier has been measured using the same technique and the electric
 and magnetic fields distributions are shown on graphics.
 Near-field scanner A near-field scanner consists of a pulsed network analyzer
 (PNA) connected to an RF probe carried by a low cost 3D printer.
 The block diagram of the near-field measurement system is shown on Fig.1.
 The network analyzer is used to generate and measure the response of the
 DUT.
 PC software controls the movement of the RF probe mounted to the 3D printer
 and synchronizes measured data with the movement.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fig.1.
 Simplified block diagram of near-field scanner.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fig.2.Photo of near-field measurement system.
 Photo of the assembled system is shown on Fig.2 in laboratory.
 Different approach is described at the end of this article, where a low
 cost portable transceiver with receive signal strength indicator (RSSI)
 is used to measure the input level taken from the RF probes.
 Pulsed Vector Network Analyzers (PVNAs) are typically used to evaluate
 the performance of microwave components / devices under non-continuous
 operation.
 These measurements are essential when dealing with pulsed-RF applications
 like radar or burst-mode transmitters, or in semiconductor device characterizat
ion when dissipation problems need to be avoided.
 Photo of PNA-L N5230C is shown on Fig.3.
 Network analyzer is expensive equipment even for RF laboratories, but the
 functionality needed for the experiments is irreplaceable.
 They provide good dynamic range and precise frequency generation in wide
 bandwidth.
 Sweep option provides ability the DUT to be tested with different input
 powers, while the response is measured.
 This is convenient for the initial tunings of the system, where the optimal
 input power should be considered for the field measurements, so that we
 could provide the best dynamic range of the system.
 The PNA could be programmed using the standard GPIB interface or using
 telnet over Ethernet.
 The control software uses telnet for communication with the PNA and defines
 frequency range for the measurement, the number of measurement frequencies
 and receives the S-parameters data.
 Different types of probes are used to measure the electromagnetic field.
 Open ended RF probes (Fig.3a and Fig.3b) are used to measure electrical component
 (E-field) of the field, while the magnetic component (H-field) is measured
 using a closed loop RF probe like the one shown on Fig.3c.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fig.3.PNA-L N5230C.
 The scanner system could be divided in 3 parts from engineering point of
 view – mechanical, electrical and software parts.
 Mechanical part consists of all mechanical parts like Arduino PCB, RF probes,
 bearings, motors, belts, pulleys, cables, measurement equipment and more.
 The limitations in the mechanical parts define the resolution of the near-field
 scanner.
 RepRap has typical resolution of 0.1 mm on all axes, which defines the scanner
 resolution.
 Electrical part consists of Arduino Mega board with RAMPS 1.4 shield [5]
 used to control the 3D printer’s movement.
 Stepper drivers control the movement of the RF probe precisely.
 Typically rf boards have traces and gaps in orders of 0.15 to 0.2 mm.
 More precise mechanics is needed for on wafer or rf chip measurements.
 Software part could be divided into firmware and pc software.
 The firmware used in the near-field scanner is open source and is called
 Sprinter [6].
 It is configured to work with RAMPS hardware and represents a G-code interprete
r [7].
 Standard G-code commands are used to define the coordinate system (relative
 / absolute), axis, movement step and movement speed.
 Arduino is using USB to serial converter for the connection to PC and the
 software.
 From PC software the RepRap is seen as standard COM port working on 115200
 baud rate.
 Additional software written in python controls the rf probe’s movement
 and to collects measured data from the PNA synchronously.
 Before each measure­ment a number of parameters are defined: set of frequen­cie
s, measurement points in X, Y and Z directions and step size (measurement
 resolution).
 The PNA measures the amplitude response and phase for each point and for
 all set of frequencies.
 Using only this option one scan collects information about the electromagnetic
 field distribution for the given set of frequencies as amplitude and phase.
 Measured data is saved as standard Excel file for post-processing later
 on.
 Additional open source software called Paraview [8] is used for 3D visualizatio
n and post-processing of the collected data.
 The collected data could be compared with previous results from measurements
 and analyzed.
 The following two examples show the briefly explained procedure and some
 of the results collected using the near-field scanner.
 L-band antenna The scanner is used to measure the performance of L-band
 patch antenna with left handed circular polarization shown on Fig.4.
 The patch was scanned using H-field probe in range 2.0 – 2.4 GHz with 10
 MHz step.
 Fig.5 shows graphically the results from collected data.
 Amplitude distribution of the surface currents is shown on Fig.5a and Fig.5b
 for two frequencies – 2.15 and 2.3 GHz.
 Dynamic ranges of the measurements is around 45 dB and we could conclude
 that measured field is stronger for 2.3 GHz, which means that working at
 this frequency the efficiency of the antenna will be higher.
 The phase distribution is shown on Fig.5c and Fig.5d.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fig.4.Photo of near-field measurement system.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fig.5.Photo of near-field measurement system.
 The phase distributions of the field for single frequency 2.3 GHz are measured
 on two different distances from the patch’s surface – 1 mm and 3 mm.
 From the phase distribution we can see that the relative phase has changed
 in left direction from Fig.5c to Fig.5d.
 This shows that we are working with left hand circular polarized antenna.
 The overall scanned frequencies are 40 for 2.0 – 2.4 GHz band and the dynamic
 range of the measurements is around 50 dB using the PNA.
 The size of the patch antenna is 59 x 59 mm and the scanned area is 75
 x 75 x 62.5 mm.
 Simple calculations show that single scan with 1 mm resolution will give
 75 x 75 = 5625 measurement points just for one plane.
 If we set the measurement to 40 frequency points we get 5625 x 40 = 225000
 values just for the amplitude on one plane.
 From this simple example it is obvious that the main problem is the handling
 of such big data structures effectively.
 Using Paraview software it is possible to be handled and visualized big
 data structures even on laptops and standard computers.
 Different filters and cuts could be applied to the data for processing.
 It is possible collected data to be exported in video format as animation.
 This gives unique opportunities for visualization of DUT‘s resonant effects.
 Balanced amplifier Using the same technique another device was scanned.
 The balanced amplifier shown on Fig.6.
 works in the frequency range 700 – 900 MHz.
 The input of the amplifier is connected to the first port of the PNA, while
 the output is terminated with 50 load.
 The second PNA’s port is connected to the H-type RF probe and S21 parameter
 is measured.
 Measured data is shown on Fig.7a and Fig.7b.
 The orientation of the RF probe defines detectable currents on the surface
 of the PCB.
 Shown data is for such orientation of the probe, that it could detect only
 RF currents flowing along the horizontal traces between the RF input and
 the RF output.
 The vertical currents tend to be blurry and unclear on the visualization
 graphics.
 Even with single H probe we could easy distinguish, where the amplifying
 elements are.
 The balanced amplifier consists of two hybrid couplers one at the input
 and one at the output.
 The input hybrid divides the input power and split the signal in 90 deg.
 phase, so that the active components in the circuit have less coupling
 and better isolation between each other.
 The output hybrid coupler combines the amplified signal at the output in
 phase.
 Using this technique the output power increases with ~3 dB compared to
 the amplification from single amplifier device.
 Scanned area of the balanced amplifier is 45 x 90 x 3 mm with 1 mm resolution.
 On Fig.7a and Fig.7b are shown amplitudes distribution of the field for two
 frequencies respectively 760 MHz and 860 MHz.
 Visual analysis of the data shows that the field around the RF input is
 stronger at 760 MHz, which simply means that we don’t have very good matching
 for these frequency, while for 860 MHz less energy is lost in the matching.
 Another interesting observation is that we have stronger field around the
 coil elements at the output of the active devices and this field is stronger
 for the second frequency.
 Fig.8 shows the relative phase distribution for the same frequencies fig.8a/8b
 respectively 760 MHz and 860 MHz.
 Visually we could see from collected data that the phase distribution is
 somehow blurry for the lower frequency, while for 860 MHz the phase difference
 is more distinguishable.
 Upper part of the circuit has relative phase 90 degrees with respect to
 the bottom part defined by the 90-deg hybrid couplers.
 The phases near the input and output are influenced by the cables and the
 connectors to the PCB.
 There the phases are mixed with the different reflections from the design
 of the board and the connectors.
 The amplifier has ~20 dB gain in the working bandwidth and this defines
 the relatively low input power that we provide to the input in order to
 get around 0 dB at the output.
 After the amplification stage the phases are much more defined, because
 the signal is stronger and the voltage generated by the probe is higher.
 This explains the better phase distribution at the output.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fig.6.Balanced amplifier measured with the scanner..
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fig.7.Surface currents amplitude for a) 760 b) 860 MHz .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fig.8.Surface currents relative phases for a) 760 b) 860 MHz.
 Software Different types of software skills are needed for the design of
 a near-field scanner system.
 Most of the software used for these measurements is open source.
 There are many different approaches to combine the available software with
 measurement device to get even lower cost near-field scanner.
 One such example is the usage of microprocessor with RF front.
 Using Arduino board combined with appropriate transmitter and receiver
 working in the RF band of interest it is possible to get dynamic range
 better than 30 dB for amplitude measurements.
 Most important part of the project is the selection of device that could
 generate CW signal for the desired band.
 Example of such approach is the usage of low cost transceiver from ATMEL
 with integrated RF front end like ATMEGA128RFA1.
 Using the RSSI (received signal strength indicator) as an absolute measuring
 device we were able to measure the amplitude field distribution for single
 frequency with dynamic range up to 30 dB.
 Using the same processor the EM field of the patch antenna could be measured
 within the range 2.4 to 2.485 MHz in 5 MHz steps.
 In order this to be accomplished successfully additional step should be
 considered for synchronization between the transmitter’s and receiver’s
 frequency.
 Most difficult part of the software is the synchronization between the
 measured data and control software that generates the movement of the 3D
 printer and respectively moves the RF probe.
 The software should be able to process and collect the data from the PNA
 and move the RF probe fast enough and with the desired accuracy.
 All python software is published in repository [9].
 Conclusion This article tries to present a work done for solving a complex
 problem like near-field scanning technique using existing equipment and
 tries to describe the process of building low cost near-field measurement
 system.
 A basic setup for RF measurements of electromagnetic field has been set
 and two radio frequency devices were measured.
 Measured data was presented visually and analyzed.
 The potential of the approach is not limited to EM measurements only and
 could be applied to temperature measurements also.
 Finer near-field scanners [10] need better mechanical structure and finer
 stepper control for IC measurements.
 Software part is applicable to all single probe scanners.
 Acknowledgements The authors thank to all the persons involved in the open
 source software movement and RepRap project.
 Without their hard work and skillful designed software this project would
 be much harder to for us and we appreciate their devotion.
 The authors thank to Scientific Research Found of Sofia University St.
 Kliment Ohridski for the support.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
